Motivation
==========

sphinx-mounts exists to bridge the gap between modern build systems
— particularly `Bazel <https://bazel.build/>`__ — and the
IDE-extension layer that has grown up around Docs-as-Code workflows
and the traceability work demanded by safety-critical software
projects.

Two valid wishes in tension
---------------------------

Sphinx is deliberately built around a project — a tree of source
files with a known root, an ``index.rst``, and a docname space that
mirrors how the documentation reads end-to-end. Users *want* that
structure; it is what makes the narrative flow legible to readers.

Build systems are built around the opposite premise. In tools like
Bazel, composability — declaring "this artefact depends on these
files and those groups of files" — is the core principle. The
knowledge of how content fits together lives inside the build
system, not in the source tree.

The two wishes are in diametrical conflict, and both are valid.

A third axis sits on top. For pure requirements management — say,
a Sphinx-Needs corpus extracted to back a safety statement — the
documentation structure barely matters. What matters is the
requirements graph and its traceability links; the file or chapter
a given requirement lives in is incidental to the safety claim.

But documentation is still read by humans, and increasingly by
agents and LLMs, and both benefit from a coherent narrative.
Requirements themselves typically reference *files* — images,
architecture diagrams, reference standards — that live on the
filesystem. Exchange formats such as
`ReqIF <https://www.omg.org/spec/ReqIF/>`__ model these
attachments as first-class parts of the requirement. The dependency
on file paths (even relative ones) cannot be elegantly delegated to
the build system: the documentation source needs to *see* the
attached file at a known relative location.

So a real-world Sphinx project for safety-critical work has to
satisfy all three at once — narrative structure for readers,
composability for the build system, and concrete on-disk file
dependencies for requirements that point at images and diagrams.

The gap: Bazel sandbox vs. live IDE feedback
--------------------------------------------

A build system like Bazel is the right tool to express
"this documentation depends on those files generated by that rule".
It computes a complete, hermetic graph of inputs and outputs and
runs commands inside sandboxes. For a Sphinx project that gathers
documentation from many sources — generated API references,
requirement bundles from sibling repositories, schema-driven
``needs`` imports — Bazel cleanly answers *what* gets built and
*where* the results land.

What Bazel does not answer well is *editing feedback*. A developer
authoring an RST or Markdown file inside a generated bundle wants
their editor to:

- highlight broken cross-references *as they type*;
- complete docnames and ``:ref:`` labels against the actual
  project;
- show ``needs`` metadata, traceability links, and lint diagnostics
  without running ``sphinx-build`` in a Bazel sandbox continuously;
- present a faithful preview of how the file will render in the
  final docs.

That is what an IDE extension is for. Extensions such as `ubCode`_
are designed to read a project's configuration and its source tree
and provide exactly the above. The catch is that they cannot do it
when the project's configuration lives inside an executable Python
file (``conf.py``) that the IDE would have to evaluate — with all
of the project's transitive dependencies — to learn anything about
the project's structure.

Why the usual workarounds fall short
------------------------------------

The usual answer to "I have RST generated outside ``srcdir``" is to
copy or symlink those bundles into the Sphinx source tree before
the build. That works for ``sphinx-build``, but it costs more than
it appears to:

- **IDE tools have to replicate the copy** before they can read the
  content, doubling the work and adding state that is easy to get
  wrong.
- **Duplication breeds inconsistency.** Two on-disk copies of a
  file drift, caches go stale, and the linter ends up disagreeing
  with the build.
- **A construction step is required.** Something has to run *before*
  Sphinx to put the files in place — yet another script the project
  has to maintain and version.
- **Index files have to be generated** (dirtying the working tree
  with synthesised ``index.rst`` files), or globbed toctrees have
  to be used (which silently swallow missing documents and obscure
  the structure).
- **Orphan-page warnings** become routine, because the host project
  cannot easily know which files the staging step deposited.

Custom Sphinx extensions narrowly tailored to one source format —
for example `sphinx-codelinks`_ extracting traceability from source
comments, or `Doxylink <https://sphinxcontrib-doxylink.readthedocs.io/>`__
bridging into Doxygen XML — are a legitimate complement when the
source is specialised enough. They do not, however, generalise to
"make this directory of finished RST or Markdown visible to Sphinx
without copying it" — which is the gap sphinx-mounts fills.

Three properties fall out of all this:

1. **A declarative configuration** that every tool — Sphinx, IDE,
   linter, indexer — can read without evaluating a Python file.
2. **A zero-copy mechanism** — files are read in place from their
   original location, with no staging directory, no symlink farm,
   and no pre-build construction step.
3. **A binding mechanism that leaves the source tree untouched** —
   mount points are virtual, no ``index.rst`` is synthesised, no
   toctree is globbed, no orphan-page warnings are emitted.

How sphinx-mounts closes the gap
--------------------------------

sphinx-mounts moves the *one* piece of configuration the IDE
actually needs — "where do the documentation source files live and
under what docname prefix do they appear?" — out of ``conf.py`` and
into a static :ref:`ubproject.toml <related-projects>`. That TOML
is:

- **read by Sphinx at build time** to set up the mounts;
- **read by IDE extensions at edit time** to resolve
  cross-references and run live diagnostics;
- **read by any other tool** — linters, CI gates, doc indexers —
  that wants to understand the project without running Python.

A single file is then the shared contract between the build system
and the editor. The IDE extension gets the entire dependency
picture: it knows which directories Bazel will populate, where on
disk those directories will be (the ``bazel-bin`` / ``bazel-out``
symlinks are workspace-relative and identical on every OS), and
what docname namespace each will inhabit after the build. One
Bazel target — typically a filegroup that materialises every
generated bundle the host project mounts — is enough to give the
IDE the full picture.

Once that target has been built once, the IDE extension can:

- preview a mounted RST or Markdown file in place, exactly as
  Sphinx will render it;
- resolve ``:doc:`` / ``:ref:`` / Sphinx-Needs links between the
  host project and every mounted bundle;
- lint and validate a bundle in isolation, against the host's
  configuration;
- analyse traceability — for the requirement / verification chains
  central to safety-critical projects — without firing off a full
  ``sphinx-build``.

The same ``ubproject.toml`` is also what Sphinx itself uses *inside*
the Bazel sandbox: the build is driven by ``bazel-bin`` paths, and
``sphinx-mounts`` reads them in place rather than forcing a copy
step. The sandboxed build and the editor see the same files, with
the same docname layout — no drift between "what the IDE thinks the
project looks like" and "what Sphinx ultimately builds".

.. _vs-sphinx-collections:

Why not just use ``sphinx-collections``?
----------------------------------------

`sphinx-collections`_ solves a superset of the same problem — getting
external content into a Sphinx build — and is a sensible choice for
projects that need more than what sphinx-mounts offers. The two tools
sit at different points on the *generic vs. focused* axis.

``sphinx-collections`` is a **generic, driver-based** content-collector.
At build time it runs one of its many drivers per configured
collection — ``copy_file``, ``copy_folder``, ``symlink``, ``git``,
``string``, ``function``, ``jinja``, ``report`` — and writes the
result into ``_collections/<name>/`` inside ``srcdir`` so Sphinx can
read it. The drivers are the API: pick the right one for where your
content lives (a local path, a git URL, a Python function, a Jinja
template, …) and ``sphinx-collections`` materialises it for Sphinx.

``sphinx-mounts`` is the opposite trade-off — **one mechanism, no
materialisation**. It assumes some *external* system (Bazel, Make,
``rsync``, a sibling repo, your file manager) has already put files
at a known filesystem path; the extension's only job is to make that
path visible to Sphinx's docname resolver in place. Nothing is
copied, symlinked, cloned, generated, or written into ``srcdir``.

Practical consequences:

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 35 35 30

   * - Aspect
     - ``sphinx-collections``
     - ``sphinx-mounts``
   * - Content acquisition
     - In Sphinx, via drivers (clone, copy, render, …)
     - Out of Sphinx; the build system / a developer puts files in
       place beforehand
   * - On-disk location of mounted docs
     - ``<srcdir>/_collections/<name>/`` (build-time copy)
     - Wherever they originally live (read in place)
   * - Number of integration mechanisms
     - 8+ drivers covering many use cases
     - 1 — directory or file list on the filesystem
   * - Configuration surface
     - One ``collections`` dict in ``conf.py`` with per-driver knobs
     - One declarative ``ubproject.toml`` ``[[mounts]]`` array
   * - IDE story
     - Editor sees ``_collections/`` only after a Sphinx build;
       contents may not be in version control
     - Editor sees the original files directly; the same
       ``ubproject.toml`` the build reads is what `ubCode`_ resolves
       against
   * - Right fit when
     - You want Sphinx itself to pull content from heterogeneous
       sources (git, URLs, templates, callbacks) and you are happy
       for those sources to be materialised directly into the Sphinx
       tree, with neither Sphinx nor the IDE retaining knowledge of
       the original-source mapping
     - The "where do files come from" question is already answered by
       a separate build system or workflow, and you just want Sphinx
       to read them

In short: pick ``sphinx-collections`` when Sphinx needs to *fetch* or
*generate* content as part of its own build; pick ``sphinx-mounts``
when content already exists at a known path and you want Sphinx (and
every other tool reading ``ubproject.toml``) to see it without an
intermediate staging step.

Why this matters in safety-critical projects
--------------------------------------------

Docs-as-Code in regulated environments tends to come with strict
constraints:

- **Traceability** between requirements, specifications,
  implementation, and verification must be auditable and
  consistent across many repositories.
- **Distributed authoring** is the norm — each component owns its
  own RST / Markdown source tree, contributed back into a host
  documentation build.
- **Reproducibility** of the build is a hard requirement; the
  build system, not the developer's local environment, must decide
  what goes in.
- **Fast feedback** is what keeps a fast-moving project's
  documentation in a buildable state. If the only way to see
  whether a cross-reference resolves is to wait on a multi-minute
  Bazel + Sphinx pipeline, errors accumulate.

sphinx-mounts is small in scope on purpose: it focuses on the one
piece that lets all of these layers cooperate — making generated
documentation sources visible to Sphinx in place, via a
declarative config the IDE can also read — and lets Bazel, Sphinx,
and the IDE each do what they are good at.

The compact picture
-------------------

::

       ┌─────────────────────────────────────────────┐
       │  Bazel rules                                │
       │  - decide what's in the build               │
       │  - emit bundles to bazel-bin / bazel-out    │
       └────────────────────┬────────────────────────┘
                            │ both read ▼
            ┌───────────────┴──────────────────┐
            │       ubproject.toml             │
            │  (static, declarative,           │
            │   shared by every consumer)      │
            └───────────────┬──────────────────┘
                            │
        ┌───────────────────┴───────────────────────┐
        ▼                                           ▼
    ┌───────────────────┐                ┌─────────────────────────┐
    │ Sphinx + sphinx-  │                │ ubCode / other IDE      │
    │ mounts in the     │                │ extensions              │
    │ Bazel sandbox     │                │  - live preview         │
    │  - read in place  │                │  - cross-ref completion │
    │  - no copy step   │                │  - linting, traceability│
    │  - write HTML     │                │  - no sphinx-build run  │
    └───────────────────┘                └─────────────────────────┘

The developer experience this unlocks — generated, distributed
documentation that nevertheless renders, lints, and traces
**immediately** in the editor — is the entire point.
